specs/src/parameters_v3.md, before:

# Parameters v3

The parameters below represent the parameters for app version 3.

Note that not all of these parameters are changeable via governance. This list
also includes parameter that require a hardfork to change due to being manually
hardcoded in the application or they are blocked by the `x/paramfilter` module.

## Global parameters

| Parameter          | Default | Summary                                                                                                                | Changeable via Governance |
|--------------------|---------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------|
| MaxBlockSizeBytes  | 100MiB  | Hardcoded value in CometBFT for the protobuf encoded block.                                                            | False                     |
| MaxSquareSize      | 128     | Hardcoded maximum square size determined per shares per row or column for the original data square (not yet extended). | False                     |
| UpgradeHeightDelay | 100800  | Height based delay after a successful `MsgTryUpgrade` has been submitted.                                              | False                     |

## Module parameters

| Module.Parameter                              | Default                                     | Summary                                                                                                                             | Changeable via Governance |
|-----------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------|
| auth.MaxMemoCharacters                        | 256                                         | Largest allowed size for a memo in bytes.                                                                                           | True                      |
| auth.SigVerifyCostED25519                     | 590                                         | Gas used to verify Ed25519 signature.                                                                                               | True                      |
| auth.SigVerifyCostSecp256k1                   | 1000                                        | Gas used to verify secp256k1 signature.                                                                                             | True                      |
| auth.TxSigLimit                               | 7                                           | Max number of signatures allowed in a multisig transaction.                                                                         | True                      |
| auth.TxSizeCostPerByte                        | 10                                          | Gas used per transaction byte.                                                                                                      | False                      |
| bank.SendEnabled                              | true                                        | Allow transfers.                                                                                                                    | False                     |
| blob.GasPerBlobByte                           | 8                                           | Gas used per blob byte.                                                                                                             | False                      |
| blob.GovMaxSquareSize                         | 64                                          | Governance parameter for the maximum square size of the original data square.                                                       | True                      |
| consensus.block.MaxBytes                      | 1974272 bytes (~1.88 MiB)                   | Governance parameter for the maximum size of the protobuf encoded block.                                                            | True                      |
| consensus.block.MaxGas                        | -1                                          | Maximum gas allowed per block (-1 is infinite).                                                                                     | True                      |
| consensus.block.TimeIotaMs                    | 1000                                        | Minimum time added to the time in the header each block.                                                                            | False                     |
| consensus.evidence.MaxAgeDuration             | 1814400000000000 (21 days)                  | The maximum age of evidence before it is considered invalid in nanoseconds. This value should be identical to the unbonding period. | True                      |
| consensus.evidence.MaxAgeNumBlocks            | 120960                                      | The maximum number of blocks before evidence is considered invalid. This value will stop CometBFT from pruning block data.          | True                      |
| consensus.evidence.MaxBytes                   | 1MiB                                        | Maximum size in bytes used by evidence in a given block.                                                                            | True                      |
| consensus.validator.PubKeyTypes               | Ed25519                                     | The type of public key used by validators.                                                                                          | False                     |
| consensus.Version.AppVersion                  | 3                                           | Determines protocol rules used for a given height. Incremented by the application upon an upgrade.                                  | True                      |
| distribution.BaseProposerReward               | 0                                           | Reward in the mint denomination for proposing a block.                                                                              | True                      |
| distribution.BonusProposerReward              | 0                                           | Extra reward in the mint denomination for proposers based on the voting power included in the commit.                               | True                      |
| distribution.CommunityTax                     | 0.02 (2%)                                   | Percentage of the inflation sent to the community pool.                                                                             | True                      |
| distribution.WithdrawAddrEnabled              | true                                        | Enables delegators to withdraw funds to a different address.                                                                        | True                      |
| gov.DepositParams.MaxDepositPeriod            | 604800000000000 (1 week)                    | Maximum period for token holders to deposit on a proposal in nanoseconds.                                                           | True                      |
| gov.DepositParams.MinDeposit                  | 10_000_000_000 utia (10,000 TIA)            | Minimum deposit for a proposal to enter voting period.                                                                              | True                      |
| gov.TallyParams.Quorum                        | 0.334 (33.4%)                               | Minimum percentage of total stake needed to vote for a result to be considered valid.                                               | True                      |
| gov.TallyParams.Threshold                     | 0.50 (50%)                                  | Minimum proportion of Yes votes for proposal to pass.                                                                               | True                      |
| gov.TallyParams.VetoThreshold                 | 0.334 (33.4%)                               | Minimum value of Veto votes to Total votes ratio for proposal to be vetoed.                                                         | True                      |
| gov.VotingParams.VotingPeriod                 | 604800000000000 (1 week)                    | Duration of the voting period in nanoseconds.                                                                                       | True                      |
| ibc.ClientGenesis.AllowedClients              | []string{"06-solomachine", "07-tendermint"} | List of allowed IBC light clients.                                                                                                  | True                      |
| ibc.ConnectionGenesis.MaxExpectedTimePerBlock | 7500000000000 (75 seconds)                  | Maximum expected time per block in nanoseconds under normal operation.                                                              | True                      |
| ibc.Transfer.ReceiveEnabled                   | true                                        | Enable receiving tokens via IBC.                                                                                                    | True                      |
| ibc.Transfer.SendEnabled                      | true                                        | Enable sending tokens via IBC.                                                                                                      | True                      |
| icahost.HostEnabled                           | True                                        | Enables or disables the Inter-Chain Accounts host module.                                                                           | True                      |
| icahost.AllowMessages                         | [icaAllowMessages]                          | Defines a list of sdk message typeURLs allowed to be executed on a host chain.                                                      | True                      |
| minfee.NetworkMinGasPrice                     | 0.000001 utia                               | All transactions must have a gas price greater than or equal to this value.                                                         | True                      |
| mint.BondDenom                                | utia                                        | Denomination that is inflated and sent to the distribution module account.                                                          | False                     |
| mint.DisinflationRate                         | 0.10 (10%)                                  | The rate at which the inflation rate decreases each year.                                                                           | False                     |
| mint.InitialInflationRate                     | 0.08 (8%)                                   | The inflation rate the network starts at.                                                                                           | False                     |
| mint.TargetInflationRate                      | 0.015 (1.5%)                                | The inflation rate that the network aims to stabilize at.                                                                           | False                     |
| packetfowardmiddleware.FeePercentage          | 0                                           | % of the forwarded packet amount which will be subtracted and distributed to the community pool.                                    | True                      |
| slashing.DowntimeJailDuration                 | 1 min                                       | Duration of time a validator must stay jailed.                                                                                      | True                      |
| slashing.MinSignedPerWindow                   | 0.75 (75%)                                  | The percentage of SignedBlocksWindow that must be signed not to get jailed.                                                         | True                      |
| slashing.SignedBlocksWindow                   | 5000                                        | The range of blocks used to count for downtime.                                                                                     | True                      |
| slashing.SlashFractionDoubleSign              | 0.02 (2%)                                   | Percentage slashed after a validator is jailed for double signing.                                                                  | True                      |
| slashing.SlashFractionDowntime                | 0.00 (0%)                                   | Percentage slashed after a validator is jailed for downtime.                                                                        | True                      |
| staking.BondDenom                             | utia                                        | Bondable coin denomination.                                                                                                         | False                     |
| staking.HistoricalEntries                     | 10000                                       | Number of historical entries to persist in store.                                                                                   | True                      |
| staking.MaxEntries                            | 7                                           | Maximum number of entries in the redelegation queue.                                                                                | True                      |
| staking.MaxValidators                         | 100                                         | Maximum number of validators.                                                                                                       | True                      |
| staking.MinCommissionRate                     | 0.05 (5%)                                   | Minimum commission rate used by all validators.                                                                                     | True                      |
| staking.UnbondingTime                         | 1814400 (21 days)                           | Duration of time for unbonding in seconds.                                                                                          | False                     |

Note: none of the mint module parameters are governance modifiable because they have been converted into hardcoded constants. See the x/mint README.md for more details.

[icaAllowMessages]: https://github.com/rootulp/celestia-app/blob/8caa5807df8d15477554eba953bd056ae72d4503/app/ica_host.go#L3-L18

Commit message:

docs(specs): add missing versioned consts

specs/src/parameters_v3.md, after:

# Parameters v3

The parameters below represent the parameters for app version 3.

Note that not all of these parameters are changeable via governance. This list
also includes parameter that require a hardfork to change due to being manually
hardcoded in the application or they are blocked by the `x/paramfilter` module.

## Global parameters

| Parameter            | Value         | Summary                                                                                                                            | Changeable via Governance |
|----------------------|---------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------|
| SquareSizeUpperBound | 128           | Hardcoded maximum square size which limits the number of shares per row or column for the original data square (not yet extended). | False                     |
| SubtreeRootThreshold | 64            | See ADR 13 for more details.                                                                                                       | False                     |
| MaxTxSize            | 2 MiB         | Maximum size of a transaction in bytes.                                                                                            | False                     |
| TimeoutPropose       | 3500 ms       | Specifies the time that validators wait during the proposal phase of the consensus process. See CometBFT specs for more details.   | False                     |
| TimeoutCommit        | 4200 ms       | Specifies the duration that validators wait during the Commit phase of the consensus process. See CometBFT specs for more details. | False                     |
| UpgradeHeightDelay   | 100800 blocks | Height based delay after a successful `MsgTryUpgrade` has been submitted.                                                          | False                     |
| MaxBlockSizeBytes    | 100 MiB       | Hardcoded value in CometBFT for the protobuf encoded block.                                                                        | False                     |

## Module parameters

| Module.Parameter                              | Default                                     | Summary                                                                                                                             | Changeable via Governance |
|-----------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------|
| auth.MaxMemoCharacters                        | 256                                         | Largest allowed size for a memo in bytes.                                                                                           | True                      |
| auth.SigVerifyCostED25519                     | 590                                         | Gas used to verify Ed25519 signature.                                                                                               | True                      |
| auth.SigVerifyCostSecp256k1                   | 1000                                        | Gas used to verify secp256k1 signature.                                                                                             | True                      |
| auth.TxSigLimit                               | 7                                           | Max number of signatures allowed in a multisig transaction.                                                                         | True                      |
| auth.TxSizeCostPerByte                        | 10                                          | Gas used per transaction byte.                                                                                                      | False                     |
| bank.SendEnabled                              | true                                        | Allow transfers.                                                                                                                    | False                     |
| blob.GasPerBlobByte                           | 8                                           | Gas used per blob byte.                                                                                                             | False                     |
| blob.GovMaxSquareSize                         | 64                                          | Governance parameter for the maximum square size of the original data square.                                                       | True                      |
| consensus.block.MaxBytes                      | 1974272 bytes (~1.88 MiB)                   | Governance parameter for the maximum size of the protobuf encoded block.                                                            | True                      |
| consensus.block.MaxGas                        | -1                                          | Maximum gas allowed per block (-1 is infinite).                                                                                     | True                      |
| consensus.block.TimeIotaMs                    | 1000                                        | Minimum time added to the time in the header each block.                                                                            | False                     |
| consensus.evidence.MaxAgeDuration             | 1814400000000000 (21 days)                  | The maximum age of evidence before it is considered invalid in nanoseconds. This value should be identical to the unbonding period. | True                      |
| consensus.evidence.MaxAgeNumBlocks            | 120960                                      | The maximum number of blocks before evidence is considered invalid. This value will stop CometBFT from pruning block data.          | True                      |
| consensus.evidence.MaxBytes                   | 1MiB                                        | Maximum size in bytes used by evidence in a given block.                                                                            | True                      |
| consensus.validator.PubKeyTypes               | Ed25519                                     | The type of public key used by validators.                                                                                          | False                     |
| consensus.Version.AppVersion                  | 3                                           | Determines protocol rules used for a given height. Incremented by the application upon an upgrade.                                  | True                      |
| distribution.BaseProposerReward               | 0                                           | Reward in the mint denomination for proposing a block.                                                                              | True                      |
| distribution.BonusProposerReward              | 0                                           | Extra reward in the mint denomination for proposers based on the voting power included in the commit.                               | True                      |
| distribution.CommunityTax                     | 0.02 (2%)                                   | Percentage of the inflation sent to the community pool.                                                                             | True                      |
| distribution.WithdrawAddrEnabled              | true                                        | Enables delegators to withdraw funds to a different address.                                                                        | True                      |
| gov.DepositParams.MaxDepositPeriod            | 604800000000000 (1 week)                    | Maximum period for token holders to deposit on a proposal in nanoseconds.                                                           | True                      |
| gov.DepositParams.MinDeposit                  | 10_000_000_000 utia (10,000 TIA)            | Minimum deposit for a proposal to enter voting period.                                                                              | True                      |
| gov.TallyParams.Quorum                        | 0.334 (33.4%)                               | Minimum percentage of total stake needed to vote for a result to be considered valid.                                               | True                      |
| gov.TallyParams.Threshold                     | 0.50 (50%)                                  | Minimum proportion of Yes votes for proposal to pass.                                                                               | True                      |
| gov.TallyParams.VetoThreshold                 | 0.334 (33.4%)                               | Minimum value of Veto votes to Total votes ratio for proposal to be vetoed.                                                         | True                      |
| gov.VotingParams.VotingPeriod                 | 604800000000000 (1 week)                    | Duration of the voting period in nanoseconds.                                                                                       | True                      |
| ibc.ClientGenesis.AllowedClients              | []string{"06-solomachine", "07-tendermint"} | List of allowed IBC light clients.                                                                                                  | True                      |
| ibc.ConnectionGenesis.MaxExpectedTimePerBlock | 7500000000000 (75 seconds)                  | Maximum expected time per block in nanoseconds under normal operation.                                                              | True                      |
| ibc.Transfer.ReceiveEnabled                   | true                                        | Enable receiving tokens via IBC.                                                                                                    | True                      |
| ibc.Transfer.SendEnabled                      | true                                        | Enable sending tokens via IBC.                                                                                                      | True                      |
| icahost.HostEnabled                           | True                                        | Enables or disables the Inter-Chain Accounts host module.                                                                           | True                      |
| icahost.AllowMessages                         | [icaAllowMessages]                          | Defines a list of sdk message typeURLs allowed to be executed on a host chain.                                                      | True                      |
| minfee.NetworkMinGasPrice                     | 0.000001 utia                               | All transactions must have a gas price greater than or equal to this value.                                                         | True                      |
| mint.BondDenom                                | utia                                        | Denomination that is inflated and sent to the distribution module account.                                                          | False                     |
| mint.DisinflationRate                         | 0.10 (10%)                                  | The rate at which the inflation rate decreases each year.                                                                           | False                     |
| mint.InitialInflationRate                     | 0.08 (8%)                                   | The inflation rate the network starts at.                                                                                           | False                     |
| mint.TargetInflationRate                      | 0.015 (1.5%)                                | The inflation rate that the network aims to stabilize at.                                                                           | False                     |
| packetfowardmiddleware.FeePercentage          | 0                                           | % of the forwarded packet amount which will be subtracted and distributed to the community pool.                                    | True                      |
| slashing.DowntimeJailDuration                 | 1 min                                       | Duration of time a validator must stay jailed.                                                                                      | True                      |
| slashing.MinSignedPerWindow                   | 0.75 (75%)                                  | The percentage of SignedBlocksWindow that must be signed not to get jailed.                                                         | True                      |
| slashing.SignedBlocksWindow                   | 5000                                        | The range of blocks used to count for downtime.                                                                                     | True                      |
| slashing.SlashFractionDoubleSign              | 0.02 (2%)                                   | Percentage slashed after a validator is jailed for double signing.                                                                  | True                      |
| slashing.SlashFractionDowntime                | 0.00 (0%)                                   | Percentage slashed after a validator is jailed for downtime.                                                                        | True                      |
| staking.BondDenom                             | utia                                        | Bondable coin denomination.                                                                                                         | False                     |
| staking.HistoricalEntries                     | 10000                                       | Number of historical entries to persist in store.                                                                                   | True                      |
| staking.MaxEntries                            | 7                                           | Maximum number of entries in the redelegation queue.                                                                                | True                      |
| staking.MaxValidators                         | 100                                         | Maximum number of validators.                                                                                                       | True                      |
| staking.MinCommissionRate                     | 0.05 (5%)                                   | Minimum commission rate used by all validators.                                                                                     | True                      |
| staking.UnbondingTime                         | 1814400 (21 days)                           | Duration of time for unbonding in seconds.                                                                                          | False                     |

Note: none of the mint module parameters are governance modifiable because they have been converted into hardcoded constants. See the x/mint README.md for more details.

[icaAllowMessages]: https://github.com/rootulp/celestia-app/blob/8caa5807df8d15477554eba953bd056ae72d4503/app/ica_host.go#L3-L18
