# PBBT Messages and Validation Logic

At a high level, all flavors of PBBT have four message types.

## Commitment

```protobuf=
message BlobMetaData {
  bytes  hash  = 1;
  uint32 size  = 2;
}

// CompactBlock commits to the transaction included in a proposal.
message CompactBlock {
  int64                 height    = 1;
  int32                 round     = 2;
  bytes                 pbbt_root = 3;
  repeated BlobMetaData blobs     = 4;
  bytes                 signature = 5;
}
```

The compact block is signed over by the proposer, and verified by converting to signbytes, and verifying using the proposer's public key to verify the included signature. This siganture is separate from the proposal signature as it is purely related to block propagation, and not meant to be part of the proposal. This allows for block propagation to be backwards compatible with older implementations.

The `BlobMetaData` contains the hash of the PFB for the blob transaction that it commits to, alongside the `size`. `size` is the length of the blobTx in bytes.

The `pbbt_root` is generated by taking the merkle root over of each of the blob transactions in `BlobMetaData` and `Have` messasges.

Verification:
- The signature MUST be valid and from the expected proposer for that height and round

## Have

```protobuf=
message HavePart {
  bytes                   hash   = 1;
  int64                   height = 2;
  int32                   round  = 3;
  tendermint.crypto.Proof proof  = 4 [(gogoproto.nullable) = false];
}

```

### Forge Resistant

In order to help verify that a `Have` message originated from a proposer, a nonce can be added to the proposer. This nonce is added to the data that is hashed. It is then included in the `HavePart`. (todo evan: list this as an option in the call)

Verification:
- The merkle proof must be verified using the `pbbt_root` in the `CompactBlock` for that height and round.

### Want

```protobuf
message WantParts {
  tendermint.libs.bits.BitArray parts  = 1 [(gogoproto.nullable) = false];
  int64                         height = 2;
  int32                         round  = 3;
}
```

## Data

```protobuf
message Part {
  int64  height = 1;
  int32  round  = 2;
  uint32 index  = 3;
  bytes  data   = 4;
}
```

Verification
- The hash of the bytes in the data field MUST match that of the `Have` message. 