specs/src/specs/state_machine_modules.md, before:

# State Machine Modules

Celestia app is built using the cosmos-sdk, and follows standard cosmos-sdk module structure.

## `celestia-app` Specific Modules

- [blob](../../../x/blob/README.md)
- [qgb](../../../x/qgb/README.md)
- [mint](../../../x/mint/README.md)
- [paramfilter](../../../x/paramfilter/README.md)
- [upgrade](../../../x/upgrade/README.md)
- [tokenfilter](../../../x/tokenfilter/README.md)

## Standard `cosmos-sdk` Modules

- [auth](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/blob/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/auth/spec/README.md)
- [authz](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/blob/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/authz/spec/README.md)
- [bank](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/blob/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/bank/spec/README.md)
- [capability](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/blob/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/capability/spec/README.md)
- [crisis](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/blob/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/crisis/spec/README.md)
- [distribution](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/blob/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/distribution/spec/README.md)
- [evidence](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/blob/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/evidence/spec/README.md)
- [feegrant](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/blob/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/feegrant/spec/README.md)
- [genutil](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/tree/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/genutil) (no spec)
- [gov](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/blob/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/gov/spec/README.md)
- [params](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/blob/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/params/spec/README.md)
- [ibc](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc/blob/f990a7f96eb7753c2fabbd49ed50b64d3a807629/README.md)
- [slashing](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/blob/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/slashing/spec/README.md)
- [staking](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/blob/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/staking/spec/README.md)
- [transfer](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc/blob/f990a7f96eb7753c2fabbd49ed50b64d3a807629/spec/app/ics-020-fungible-token-transfer/README.md)
- [vesting](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/tree/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/auth/vesting) (no spec)

Commit message:

chore: updates the upgrade module link to the signal module (#3326)
(cherry picked from commit d8031c12e15fcde3202853aaf602e350d4c6a594)

# Conflicts:
#	specs/src/specs/state_machine_modules.md

specs/src/specs/state_machine_modules.md, after:

# State Machine Modules

Celestia app is built using the cosmos-sdk, and follows standard cosmos-sdk module structure.

## `celestia-app` Specific Modules

<<<<<<< HEAD
- [blob](../../../x/blob/README.md)
- [qgb](../../../x/qgb/README.md)
- [mint](../../../x/mint/README.md)
- [paramfilter](../../../x/paramfilter/README.md)
- [upgrade](../../../x/upgrade/README.md)
- [tokenfilter](../../../x/tokenfilter/README.md)
=======
- [blob](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/blob/main/x/blob/README.md)
- [blobstream](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/blob/main/x/blobstream/README.md)
- [minfee](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/blob/main/x/minfee/README.md)
- [mint](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/blob/main/x/mint/README.md)
- [paramfilter](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/blob/main/x/paramfilter/README.md)
- [signal](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/blob/main/x/signal/README.md)
- [tokenfilter](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/blob/main/x/tokenfilter/README.md)
>>>>>>> d8031c12 (chore: updates the upgrade module link to the signal module (#3326))

## Standard `cosmos-sdk` Modules

- [auth](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/blob/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/auth/spec/README.md)
- [authz](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/blob/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/authz/spec/README.md)
- [bank](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/blob/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/bank/spec/README.md)
- [capability](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/blob/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/capability/spec/README.md)
- [crisis](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/blob/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/crisis/spec/README.md)
- [distribution](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/blob/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/distribution/spec/README.md)
- [evidence](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/blob/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/evidence/spec/README.md)
- [feegrant](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/blob/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/feegrant/spec/README.md)
- [genutil](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/tree/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/genutil) (no spec)
- [gov](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/blob/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/gov/spec/README.md)
- [params](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/blob/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/params/spec/README.md)
- [ibc](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc/blob/f990a7f96eb7753c2fabbd49ed50b64d3a807629/README.md)
- [slashing](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/blob/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/slashing/spec/README.md)
- [staking](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/blob/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/staking/spec/README.md)
- [transfer](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc/blob/f990a7f96eb7753c2fabbd49ed50b64d3a807629/spec/app/ics-020-fungible-token-transfer/README.md)
- [vesting](https://github.com/celestiaorg/cosmos-sdk/tree/v1.14.0-sdk-v0.46.11/x/auth/vesting) (no spec)
