app/benchmarks/README.md, before:

# Benchmarks

This package contains benchmarks for the ABCI methods with the following transaction types:

- Message send
- IBC update client
- PayForBlobs

## How to run

To run the benchmarks, run the following in the root directory:

```shell
go test -tags=bench_abci_methods -bench=<benchmark_name> app/benchmarks/benchmark_*
```

## Results

The results are outlined in the [results](results.md) document.

## Key takeaways

We decided to softly limit the number of messages contained in a block, via introducing the `MaxPFBMessages` and `MaxNonPFBMessages`, and checking against them in prepare proposal.

This way, the default block construction mechanism will only propose blocks that respect these limitations. And if a block that doesn't respect them reached consensus, it will still be accepted since this rule is not consensus breaking.

As specified in [results](results.md) document, those results were generated on 16 core 48GB RAM machine, and gave us certain thresholds. However, when we run the same experiments on the recommended validator setup, 4 cores 16GB RAM, the numbers were lower. These low numbers are what we used in the limits.

Commit message:

docs: proofreading and edits (#4069)
### **Title: Update Benchmark Results and Correct Formatting**

### **Description:**

This pull request includes several updates to the benchmark
documentation in the `results.md` file. The changes primarily focus on
improving the formatting, standardizing block sizes, adding commas for
better readability in numeric values, and ensuring consistency in
capitalization and phrasing throughout the document.

### **Changes:**

1. **Grammar and Consistency:**
- Corrected and standardized phrasing in several sections, including
fixing minor grammatical issues:
- "We decided to softly limit the number of messages contained in a
block, **by** introducing the `MaxPFBMessages` and `MaxNonPFBMessages`,
and checking against them **while preparing** the proposal."
- Corrected sentence to: "And if a block that doesn't respect them
**reaches** consensus, it will still be accepted since this rule is not
consensus breaking."
- Capitalized `MB` consistently across the document (e.g., `8mb` →
`8MB`).

2. **Clarification in Results Descriptions:**
- Reworded and clarified several benchmark descriptions, such as
specifying machine configurations more clearly (e.g., `16-core, 48GB RAM
machine` instead of `16 core 48GB RAM machine`).


### **Impact:**
These updates will make the documentation clearer and easier to read,
improving the consistency and quality of the benchmark results. This
also ensures that all terms and values are uniformly presented for
easier understanding and future reference.

app/benchmarks/README.md, after:

# Benchmarks

This package contains benchmarks for the ABCI methods with the following transaction types:

- Message send
- IBC update client
- PayForBlobs

## How to Run

To run the benchmarks, run the following in the root directory:

```shell
go test -tags=bench_abci_methods -bench=<benchmark_name> app/benchmarks/benchmark_*
```

## Results

The results are outlined in the [results](results.md) document.

## Key takeaways

We decided to softly limit the number of messages contained in a block, by introducing the `MaxPFBMessages` and `MaxNonPFBMessages`, and checking against them while preparing the proposal.

This way, the default block construction mechanism will only propose blocks that respect these limitations. And if a block that doesn't respect them reaches consensus, it will still be accepted since this rule is not consensus breaking.

As specified in the [results](results.md) document, those results were generated on a 16-core, 48GB RAM machine and gave us certain thresholds. However, when we ran the same experiments on the recommended validator setup, with a 4-core, 16GB RAM machine, the numbers were lower. These low numbers are what we used in the limits.
